feat: mark invalid entries as fuzzy | FC-0012 (#1944)
openedx/openedx-translations: docs/decisions/0002-mark-fuzzy-entries.rst

> Mark Transifex invalid entries as fuzzy

Author: you're right. it's not only about Transifex.

#######################################

Problem
*******

As part of the `OEP-58`_ Transifex GitHub App bot has now syncs Translations.
Bot creates pull requests with invalid entries in the
po-files. These entries are validated by `LexiQA`_, Transifex-builtin quality
checks as well as human reviewers. However, some invalid translations still
make it into the sync translation pull requests which breaks
``django compilemessages`` command and is catchable by ``msgfmt``.

If Transifex had marked the invalid entries as fuzzy, then the
``django compilemessages`` command would have ignored them. However, that's
not the case. Therefore, we need to perform this task ourselves.

Design Decision
***************

Implement a GitHub Actions workflow that will mark the invalid entries as
``fuzzy``. Then create a commit -- editing the pull request -- to branch
of the bot pull request.

To ensure a safe and reliable workflow, the following workflows will be
combined into one single workflow with multiple jobs:

#. Run ``python-tests.yml`` to validate the python code

> #. Then, run ``validate-translation-files.yml`` which performs the following:

Author: Yes, you're right. This pull request is only 50% done.

   #. Validate the po-files using ``msgfmt``
   #. Mark the invalid entries as fuzzy (writes to the pofile)
   #. Validate the files again to ensure the files are became valid
   #. Commit the fixes if any

#. Mark invalid entires as fuzzy therefore excluded from .mo files as well as msgfmt
#. Validate the files again to ensure the files are still valid
#. Commit the fixes
#. Run the lint commits
#. Push to the branch

> #. Trigger auto merge

Author: I'd rather be specific when it comes to "write" workflows as opposed to "test" workflows. If you don't mind, I'll keep it explicit.

> #. Run the lint commits
> #. Push to the branch
> #. Trigger auto merge

Reviewer: Keeping it explicit works for me.

```suggestion
#. Run ``commitlint``
#. Push updated entries to the PR branch
#. Automatically merge the PR
```

**Pros**

* There's no need for manual intervention, therefor it's fast and won't

>   create a backlog of pull requests.

Reviewer: Avoiding a PR backlog is one pro, but I don't think it's the only one. I think I touched on a couple in my comment on slack.

> There are a couple of use cases that come to mind (please let me know if I'm misunderstanding this):
> * Old translated string passes msgfmt, new translated string fails msgfmt
>   * With the current process, the old string would still be pulled by atlas
>   * With the fuzzy process, the new fuzzy string would be pulled by atlas and the string wouldn't be translated in the application
> * Lots of new strings added, one fails msgfmt
>   * With the current process, none of the new strings would make it into the openedx-translations repo
>   * With the fuzzy process, all of the new strings would make it in

**Cons**

* The workflow script runs and edits the pull request, which can be
  confusing for the reviewers.
* The workflow lacks a notification mechanism to notify the reviewers

>   that their translations are invalid.

Reviewer: I discussed this with Sarina and I think we can address this fairly elegantly by allowing this action to create issues on https://github.com/openedx/wg-translations/issues

It might take a bit of work to ensure we don't spam that repo with issues. I'd be happy to discuss how this could be implemented with you!

Author: You're right, we should implement a notification mechanism.

I think the following has the _same_ cost and complexity, therefore we should implement the one with the best Translator Experience.

## Option 1: WG Translations project GitHub issues
Create a list of people/teams to notify when things fail. One way is to utilize a [CODEOWNER](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/customizing-your-repository/about-code-owners) file to know who to nofity for which resource/language pair. Often the file has flexible enough rules to specific files belongs to which contributor.

If the CODEOWNER file format turns to be difficult, we can implement a YAML file to provide an easier to parse file in a similar manner.

## Option 2: Slack comments in a new `#translations-wg-issues` channel 
Post to a message to a new Slack channel e.g. `#translations-wg-issues` to announce the issue.

The Slack message may include a handle to the Slack CODEOWNER

 with handles to assign Slack users handles and let the bot notify them.

## Option 3: Email the contributors with their Transifex emails
Emails are not public, but definitely one way to tackle the issue

## Option 4: Open Transifex issues for each entry, and mark them as "unreviewed"
Get the `msgid` of the `fuzzy` entry then look it up on Transifex and open an issue. This notifies Transifex admins with a direct link to the entry via email. However, those issues are not visible to translators as far as I know.

We can use one or more notification mechanism based on what we see fit.

Reviewer: Since goal is to implement the solution that provides translators with the best experience, I think this is a good question to ask in the #wg-translations slack channel.

checks, and human reviewers. During this synchronization process, the
`Transifex GitHub App`_ creates pull requests to this repository. The
translations in the pull requests are then validated by ``msgfmt`` in CI.

Problem
*******
There are times when the translations being synchronized fail ``msgfmt``
validation. This prevents the pull requests from being merged.

Design Decision
***************

A GitHub Actions workflow will be implemented to mark invalid entries in
synchronized ``.po`` files as ``fuzzy``. This will update pull requests
created by the `Transifex GitHub App`_.

To ensure a safe and reliable workflow, the following workflows will be
combined into one single workflow with multiple jobs:

#. Run ``python-tests.yml`` to validate the python code
#. Then, run ``validate-translation-files.yml`` which performs the following:

   #. Validate the po-files using ``msgfmt``
   #. Notify the translators about the invalid entries via the preferred
      communication channel (Slack, Transifex, GitHub)
   #. Edit the po files to mark invalid entries as ``fuzzy``, so it's
      excluded from ``.mo`` files
   #. Revalidate the files

> #. Commit the fixes

Reviewer: I'm not sure if "fixes" is the best word here, as the workflow isn't fixing entries, it's just marking broken ones as fuzzy.

Maybe just
```suggestion
#. Commit the updated entries
```
